..  _cosc2325-project-report:

###########################
Group Project Report Format
###########################

The Computer Studies Advisory Group, a panel of major corporation executives in
Austin who help the department structure our programs to make sure you end up
employable, told is in a recent meeting that they are concerned that students
who apply for their jobs really cannot put together descent reports, and need more
practice. In response to that, I have formalized the requirements for the group
project report a bit. Reports are not hard to write, it just takes a bit of practice.

******************
Writing the report
******************

Most employers expect that you know how to use `Microsoft Office` tools. That
is not critical in this course, but we need a tool for creating a professional
looking report. If you do not own `MS Office`, I recommend `Open Office` which
is available for any platform. 

You should include figures from documentation you find for your project You can
use free screen capture programs do get these images (I use `MWsnap
<http://www.mirekw.com/winfreeware/mwsnap.html>`_ on the PC) 

**************
Report Outline
**************

Here is the basic structure you should use to write your report. Remember that
this is a group effort, and each member of the group should contribute material
to the report.

Title page
==========

This page should identify the device and microcontroller platform your project
used. It should also list all the team members names.

Table of Contents
=================

This should be obvious. 

Introduction
============

In this section, you should describe the basic hardware components you chose to
experiment with. You should also describe the experiment you are going to
conduct that demonstrates that hardware. This section is not a detailed report
on those components, just a basic introduction tot he parts you ended up with,
and the demonstration you decided to set up.

The Microcontroller Platform
============================

Describe the microcontroller board you are using. This description should
indicate where such boards can be obtained, and lay out the basic architecture
of the board. You can paste screen captures of diagrams from any documentation
you find online. You should describe the basic capabilities of the actual
processor on the board. Show a block diagram of the device indicating any
special features you find that are interesting and useful in conducting your
experiment.

The Test Device
===============

Each project uses some kind of device that ends up being controlled by the
microcontroller. Describe that device and give an overview of what it might be
used for. Basically, describe what is involved in interacting with the device.
Agian, use screen captures of diagrams from documentation is you can.

Development tools
=================

Detail the tools you needed to obtain to work with the microcontroller and the
device. You also need to identify any additional software you needed to
interact with your test device.

Your Experiment
===============

Describe the experiment you set up. What led you to pick this particular
experiment (hopefully it was not because it was easy!) Be sure to show how your
experiment was set up. Show how the device is connected to the microcontroller.

Conclusions
===========

What did you learn about hardware control from this project? Did you get any
ideas for other projects you might try in the future?

Contributions
=============

Include a summary of each team members contributions to the project.

Project code
============

Include a listing of the code you used for this project.

***********************
Presenting your project
***********************

Each team will be required to demonstrate the project before the class. All
team members should be present for this presentation. You are not required to
make a formal presentation, meaning you do not need to build slides for this
part of the project (unless you want to). Instead, you can use the classroom
projector to display your report. (Presentations are another thing the Advisory
Board talked about with the department.) 

**********************
Submitting your report
**********************

Each member of the team should include a copy of the report in their
repository. No grades for the project will be assigned until this report is
present. You do not need to submit a printed copy of the report.

